So in this sequence of videos, we're
going to apply the greedy algorithm
design paradigm to a fundamental graph
problem, the problem of computing minimum
spanning trees.
The MST problem is a really fun
playground for greedy algorithm design,
because it's the singular problem in
which pretty much any greedy algorithm
you come up with seems to work.
So we'll talk about a couple of the
famous ones, show why they're correct,
and show how they can be implemented
using suitable data structures to be
blazingly fast.
So, I'll give you the formal problem
definition on the next slide but first
let me just say informally what it is
we're trying to accomplish.
Essentially, what we want do is connect a
bunch of points together as cheaply as
possible.
And, as usual with an abstract problem
the objects can mean something very
literal.
So maybe the points we're trying to
connect are servers in some computer
network, or it could represent something
more abstract.
Like maybe we have a model of documents
like Web Pages where we represent them as
points in space.
And we want to somehow connect those
together.
Now the main reason I'm going to spend
time on the minimum expenditure problem
is pedagogical.
It's just a great problem for sharpening
your skills with greedy algoritum design
and proof of correctness.
It'll also give us another opportunity to
see the beautiful interplay between data
structures and fast limitation of graph
algorithms.
That said that minimum expenditure
problem does have applications.
One very cool one is in clustering, and
that I'll talk about in detail in a later
video, it also comes up in networking.
So if you do a web search on spanning
tree protocol you'll also find some
information about that.
So as I said at the beginning the minimum
spanning tree problem is remarkable in
that it doesn't just admit one greedy
algorithm that's correct, but in fact it
admits multiple greedy algorithms that
are correct.
we're going to talk about two of them,
the two most well known ones.
But there are even some others believe it
or not.
So the first one we're going to discuss
beginning in the next video is Prim's MST
algorithm.
This dates back over 50 years to 1957.
in fact as you'll see Prim's algorithm
shows a remarkable number of similarities
with Dijkstra's shortest path algorithm.
So you might not be surprised to know
that Dijkstra also independently had
discovered this algorithm a couple of
years later.
But in fact it was only noticed much
later that this exact same algorithm had
been first discovered over 25 years
earlier by a mathematician named Jarnick.
For that reason you'll sometimes hear
this called Jarnick's algorithm or the
Prim-Jarnick algorithm.
for gravity and to be consistent with
some of the main text books in the area
I'm just going to call this Prim's
algorithm throughout the lectures.
The other algorithm we're going to cover
which is also rightfully famous is
Kruskal's MST algorithm.
As far as I know this was indeed first
discovered by Kruskal roughly the same
time as Prim was doing his algorithm in
the mid 50s.
And in what sense do I say these
algorithms are blazingly fast?
Well, they run in almost linear time,
linear in the number of edges of the
graph.
Specifically we'll see how using
appropriate data structures will get each
of them to run in time big O of M log N,
where M is the number of edges in the
graph, and N is the number of vertices in
the graph.
We'll employ data structures to speed up
Prim's algorithm in exactly the same way
we did for Dijkstra's algorithm, that is
we'll be using the heap data structure,
One thing that's cool about Crystal's
algorithm is it'll give us an opportunity
to study a new data structure, mainly the
union fine data structure and that's a
lot of fun to think about, in its own
right, as you'll see.
So to put this amazing running time on
perspective I want to emphasize that only
is it awesome in the sense it's you know,
barely, it's almost linear.
It takes almost barely more time to
compute the spanning tree than it does to
read the input graph.
Reading the input graph alone, remember
would take linear time.
O of M time.
But more over, graphs can have an
enormous number of spanning trees.
An exponential number.
So some of these algorithms are honing in
really quickly on a needle in a haystack.
There's no way they have time to look at
all these spanning tees, and yet they
find the one which is the best which is
optimal amongst all of them.
How do these seemingly magical algorithms
do it?
Well, to discuss the details let's start
by formalizing the Minimum Spanning Tree,
or MST problem on the next slot.
So in the MSD problem this is a graph
problem so the main part of the input is
a graph comprising verticies and edges.
I do want to emphasize for the MST
problem we are be considering only
undirected graphs.
This is different notice, than when we
discussed shortest-path problems in Part
one of the course.
There we worked with directed graphs.
There is an analogous problem to the
[INAUDIBLE] signature problem for
directed graphs.
It's often called the optimal branching
problem.
And there are fast algorithms for it, but
those algorithms are just slightly beyond
the scope of this course.
So we're not going to cover it.
We're going to discuss only undirected
graphs, and then minimum spanning trees
for them.
Now, whenever you talk about graph
problems, you need to talk about, how is
the graph actually represented.
So that's something we discussed at
length in part one.
If you don't remember, I suggest going
back and reviewing the video on graph
representations.
For the MST problem, we're going to
assume that the graph is given as an
adjacency list.
That means, we're given an array of
vertices, an array of edges.
And we have pointers, wiring vertices to
their incident edges and wiring edges
back to their two endpoints.
In addition to the graph of self the
input includes a cost, for each of the
edges, we're going to use the notation C
sebies of note the cost of a edge, E.
And in another contrast, to are
discussion of shortest path problems,
we're actually not going to care if the
edge cost are positive or negative, they
can be any number whatsoever.
So no prizes for guessing what the
outputs supposed to be, it's right there
in the problem definition, the output is
supposed to be a minimum cost spanning
tree of the graph, but let's drill down
and explain exactly what we mean by that.
So first of all what do we mean by the
cost of a tree or generally the cost of a
sub graph, as a subset of the edges.
Well we're just going to be looking at
summing up the edges in the tree that we
output.
Now the other question is what do I mean
by a tree that spans all vertices?
So let me tell you exactly what this
means, the sub graph T should have two
properties, first of all there can not be
any cycles, there can not be any loops in
this tree.
And by spanning all vertices, what I mean
is that this sub graph is what's called
connected.
That is, there's a path, using the edges
and t, from any vertex of the graph to
any other vertex.
That's what it means to span all of the
vertices.
So for example, consider the following
graph with four vertices and five edges.
I've labeled each of the five edges with
a cost, which in this case, is just an
integer between one and five.
So, let's look at some example subgraphs,
let's start with the three edges, A, B,
B, D and CD.
This sub-graph satisfies properties one
and two.
That is, it has no cycles, there's no
loops and it spans all of the vertices.
If you start at any one of these four
vertices, you can get to any of the other
four vertices by using only red edges.
So in that sense, this red sub-graph is a
spanning tree.
However, it is not the minimum cost
There is another spanning tree which is
even cheaper, has a smaller sum of edge
costs, namely the edges AC, AB, and BD.
This also has no cycles and it's also
connected but the sum of the edge cost is
only seven, smaller than the eight of the
previous spanning tree.
In fact, this pixograph is the unique
minimum spanning tree of this graph.
There is a sub graph that has three edges
which has an even smaller sum, of edge
costs, namely the triangle AB, BD and AD.
But this light blue sub graph, this
triangle, is not a spanning tree.
In fact, it fails on both counts.
It does obviously have a cycle.
It has a loop.
That's, what it is by definition.
It's also not connected, so there's no
way to get from C, the vertex, to any of
the other three vertices by following
only light blue edges.
It's disconnected, and so it fails
property one as well.
So the MST problem in general is you're
given it under a graph, like, for
example, this four note, five edge graph,
or presumably.
something much larger and an interesting
problem and your suppose to quickly
identify the minimum spanding tree like
in this example the pink subgraph.
So what I want to do next is something
you're probably quite accustomed to me
doing by this point, is I want to make a
couple of mild simplifying assumptions
just among friends.
So these assumptions are not important in
the sense that all of the conclusions of
these lectures will remain true, will
remain valid even if these assumptions
are violated but it'll make the lectures
a little bit easier.
It'll allow us to focus on the main
points and not get distracted by less
relevant details so here are the two
assumptions that we're going to make
throughout all of the lectures on minimum
spanning trees.
The first assumption we're going to make
is that the input graph G is itself
connected.
That is G contains a path from any vertex
to any other vertex.
So why am I making this assumption?
Well if this assumptions violated then
the problem isn't even well defined.
If the graph isn't connected then
certainly none of it's subgraphs are
connected so it has no spanning trees and
it's not clear what we're trying to do.
So, those of you who still remember the
stuff we covered in part one in
particular, graph search.
Should recognize that this condition's
easy to check in a pre-processing step.
Just run something like breadth first
search or depth first search.
Remember, we know how to implement those
in linear time.
And those will, in particular, tell you
whether or not the input graph is
connected.
Now, another thing you might be wondering
is, suppose it was disconnected.
Then what?
Should be really just sort of throw up
our hands and give up?
You can define a version of the minimum
spanning tree problem.
A more general one called minimum
spanning forest.
Where, basically you want the minimum
cost sub graph that spans as much stuff
as possible.
Essentially, it's responsible for
computing a spanning tree within each of
the connected components of the original
graph.
And using the algorithms I'll show you
here, Prim's algorithm, Kruskal's
algorithm, they're easily modified to
solve the more general problem with
disconnected input graphs as well.
But again, for simplicity among friends,
let's just focus on the connected graph
case that contains all of the main ideas.
Our second standing assumption throughout
all of the minimum of spanning tree
lectures will be that in the input graph
the edge costs are distinct.
So you're already use to this sort of no
ties kind of assumption from our foray
into scheduling algorithms, and we're
going to do something similar here.
Now again this assumption is not
important in the sense that the
algorithms that we cover prims algorithm
crustgrals algorithm.
They remain correct even if the input has
equal cost edges, irrespective of how
ties are broken.
So the algorithms are correct as widely
as you would want.
That's it.
I'm not going to actually prove for you
that they are correct with ties.
Remember we had our scheduling,
application it was a little bit easier to
get a proof of correctness without ties,
I gave you that, and then optionally
there was a slightly more complicated
argument that handled ties.
You can do the same thing here, but I'm
just not going to give it to you.
I'll leave that for the keen viewer to
work out for themselves.